The Vigenere cipher is a plain-text form of encoding that uses alphabetical substitution to encode text. This ancient form of cryptography dates back to the 1400s and was documented in the works of famous writers of the era such as Trithemius. The Vigenere cipher, like other contemporary cryptographic ciphers, uses something called a tabula recta, a grid of alphabetic characters where encoders can shift lines for alphabetic substitution.

pour cet exercice je [Emilie] me suis occupée de faire le cryptage. Malheureusement, je me suis trompée dès le deuxième mot du texte, ce qui fait que tout le reste du cryptage est décalé d’une lettre de la clef. J’ai montré où était l’erreur aux personnes qui décryptent [Léa et Paul], ils ont donc pu décrypter sans problème, mais j’ai dû leur donner la clef directement, car avec mon erreur : impossible de la trouver.
Ils ont utilisé les bonnes techniques pour la trouver, mais ils n’auraient pas réussi sans cela.

écart entre gm = 46
écart entre wa = 44

To do this decryption, we first located several pairs of identical letters in the text. We calculated the number of characters that separated the two language pairs (ex: between gm = 46 letters). Unfortunately, as explained in the nota bene, this did not and could not lead us anywhere. This should have given us the multiple of a number (in this case 10) which would have corresponded to the size of the key. The text would then be separated into groups of 10 letters. The letter that appears most often in the first letter of the groups would be selected to look at the vigenere table with the most frequent letter in the English language (we found that it was the letter e). The same with the most frequent letter of the second letter of the word of the groups of 10 letters. And so on, with the 10 letters of the groups. At the end we would have obtained the key, or the different possibilities for the key, we could have deduced the word.
Once we have the key, we put the word under the text to be decrypted, repeating it in a loop so that each letter has a letter of the associated key. Then we look at the table: the letter of the key on the first column of the table, we look in the row until we find the letter of the coded text and we go back to find the letter to which it corresponds.
